# MIT Analytics Lab
## Action Learning with analytics, machine learning, and the digital economy

Nidhish Nerur, Hunter Sporn, Jaeyoon Wang, and Naiqi Zhang 

A Collaboration with Sanofi: "Patient Like Me" (MIT 15.572 Analytics Lab)

1st Place out of 21 MIT Teams in semester-long project-based analytics lab competition.

## Executive Summary

**Problem Statement**: The project aims to find similar patient segments who are most likely to benefit from specific medications, especially those targeting the TNF-α protein. The TNF-α 
inhibition drugs often treat inflammatory illnesses including rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn’s disease, yet their efficacy differs across patients. Consequently, we leverage the latest data science methods to identify exceptional responders to particular treatments. These findings would optimize Sanofi’s treatment allocation and resource distribution strategies, with the goal of improving patient outcomes and the drug development process. Then, the main goal is to cluster patient groups that would perhaps experience similar responses to a given drug, enhancing personalized healthcare services.

**Overall Approach**: Our team combined the publicly available Prime Knowledge Graph (PrimeKG) and Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care (MIMIC-IV) datasets to create an interconnected knowledge graph with drug, disease, and patient information. PrimeKG offers drug and disease descriptions while MIMIC-IV contains real patient data such as demographics, lab tests, and past diagnoses. To connect these databases, we added/connected MIMIC-IV patient and hospital admission nodes to PrimeKG. With the resulting ”super-graph” of information, we sought to compute similarity scores between patient segments and the TNF-α inhibition drug. We further looked at characteristics of patients who were more likely to be administered the TNF-α drug. This process allowed us to develop actionable insights to assist with personalized treatment allocation for patients.

**Technical Insights**: The super-graph revealed there are 38 drugs and 225 diseases related to the TNF-α protein, and we wanted to delve deeper into patients associated with these specific medications or illnesses. Specifically, we discovered the hemolytic-uremic syndrome, acute coronary syndrome, and phosphorus metabolism diseases have the highest similarity scores to TNF-α. Biomedical literature suggests these diseases are strongly linked to the TNF-α protein, corroborating our results. We also identified therapeutically aligned drugs that show strong connections to TNF-α, such as PR-104, OMS-103HP, and Onerecept. We further perform a random walk across the super-graph, which is a stochastic process that traverses the graph across various nodes in the network. Random walks help to create node embeddings that capture the semantic meaning and relationships between nodes in the network graph. Additionally, the t-SNE visualization of node embeddings highlights the clusters for diseases, drugs, and other node types, emphasizing the rich semantic relationships captured through the embeddings. This information enabled us to create clusters to visualize node embeddings for patients, drugs, and diseases. Our findings can significantly improve Sanofi’s approach to drug development, identifying similar patients who would likely respond well to novel treatments.

**Sanofi Impact**: Sanofi can utilize our technical insights to enhance drug-patient matching algorithms, improve the drug development process, and prioritize patient outcomes. As we map relationships between drugs and patients, we can predict the level of a patient’s response to TNF-α inhibition drugs, enabling synthetic construction of theorized patient ”super-responder” cohorts. Consequently, Sanofi can distribute resources more effectively and design targeted randomized clinical trials for patients who are most likely to benefit from new medications. Sanofi will realize reduced costs associated with the experimentation of treatment assignment, increasing operational efficiency. Even saving marginal amounts of time in clinical trials can expedite the process for drugs to reach the market and directly impact patients. As a result, Sanofi will contribute to precision medicine, or more personalized healthcare for patients. Sanofi can further maintain its competitive position in the pharmaceutical industry with data-driven decisions that better the human condition.
